Right. Uh,
Welcome to Table.
Uh, we're in your heads.
Sure, Koto. My name's Andrew Eton.
I'm the Deputy Chair of the New Zealand Council
for Civil Liberties and an adjunct senior research fellow at
Victoria, university of Wellington and School of Government.
Uh, N-Z-T-C-L is a non-partisan voluntary organization
established in 1952, which advocates for human rights
and the maintenance and civil liberties.
Um, this is our second time we've
submitted standing Orders review.
The first time was three years ago,
and, uh, unfortunately, many
of the issues we raised three years ago is still relevant
now in our consideration.
Um, but we sent a fairly substantial written submission
about the issues that concern us, uh, to the committee,
and we assume that it's been read.
Um, we, uh,
are particularly concerned about the independence
of select committees from the executive
and for the legislature command public trust
and confidence, which is an issue
for democracies around the world.
It has to be seen to be acting independently.
Uh, members of this committee will be aware
of the exchanges over the last two days regarding the Chair
of the Environment Committee curtailing the time
for submissions on the fast
track approval of Amendment Bill.
And indeed, I watched the, uh,
the exchange at question time today.
Um, the, the council's concerned that the chair
of the committee allowed the desire of the government
to get a bill on the statute book by the end of the year
to override normal timeframes for public input on the bill.
Uh, it looked to us like it was a,
a lighting, if I can put it politely,
of the requirement in standing orders for there
to be a debate at first reading on report
back shorter than four months.
And, uh, in turn, that makes it look like the independence
of the select committee processes being compromised,
or that there was a desire by the government
to avoid debate on a shorter time report back.
This suggests to us that standing orders need to be amended
to explicitly protect against the chair
or committee significantly curtailing IE not reporting back
by a day or two early the time for evidence to be submitted
and considered by the select committee.
For example, standing order 3 0 3 states
that committees must report after six months,
unless a shorter period is instructed by the house,
and there's no explicit power for a committee
to shorten a report back.
We think this is a good place for a clarifying amendment
to make it clear that shortening consideration
below the level agreed by the house
requires a motion in the house.
Besides this recent incident,
our submission sets out our longstanding concerns
regarding analysis of submissions to select committees.
Um, in particular, uh,
and we state point this out in paragraph 52
of our written submission, David McGee,
in the fourth edition of parliamentary practice in
New Zealand said that although advisors,
although government officials are advisors to the committee,
their primary duty of public servants is
to their respective ministers.
And it is always for ministers to decide whether
to make available officials available
as advisors and which officials.
So, although they're there to support the committee,
their primary duty is to support the government
and the government's mission is to get the bill through.
Um, we raised this concern in our,
uh, submission to the 2023 standing oil was reviewed based
on our experience since then,
however, at least two select committees have public
expressed their unhappiness at government officials acting
contrary to committee's wishes, IE the
concerns that we raised.
Um, for example, in June, 2023, newsroom reported
that the Department of Internal Affairs had acted contrary
to the wishes of the Finance and Expenditure Committee.
When considering the legislation on three Waters,
and the committee's report stated, we wish to put on record
that we did experience some problems during our gruesome
of the bill and the preparation of this report to the House.
We are concerned that there were instances where it appeared
that departmental officials perhaps inadvertently
directed Parliamentary council to make changes
to the revision track version of the bill
that were either not clearly authorized by us
or ran contrary to recommendations.
And two months later, the Herald reported that MBI had
to apologize to the Foreign Affairs Defense
and Trade Select Committee
after what our chair here described as devious behavior.
The select committee was split,
and so did not call for a departmental report in its
consideration of the bill, but MB officials nevertheless
prepared a report which the immigration minister said he
would use to inform any changes.
So a Green Party member of
that select committee commented on the MB Chief Executive's
explanation saying this was not a process error.
I think that with respect, you need
to stop characterizing in that way.
They knew that the committee did not want to report.
This is a real problem in terms of how the public perceive
and can have confidence in the legislature acting
independently of the executive
and standing up for New Zealanders, having their views
properly scrutinized and reported when making
submissions to a select committee.
Now previously, resourcing for Parliament
to employ its own select committee advisors has been
hampered by government control of Parliament's budget.
But passage of the Parliament Bill changes this so
that we think the Standing Orders Review Committee should
make recommendations to that the committee
that will be considering Parliament budget setting, uh,
provide the clerk with funding
to employ significantly more officials
to guarantee Parliamentary officials provide this analysis
to MPS and not government officials.
And we say in our written submission that if the,
if this committee doesn't want to go that far,
then it should be commissioning the parliamentary library
to do comparative research on legislatures around the world,
particularly Westminster,
but I think also Ireland, the United States to say
what resourcing is given to the,
the parliamentary officials in those literature so
that the independence of select committee scrutiny
of bills is protected.
We also talk about the issues in our submission with, uh,
the rise of, uh, the use of technology to,
to both make submissions on bills
and analyze submissions on bills.
Um, I won't go into this in great detail
because we've, we've set it out on page 17
and following pages of our submission.
But we, uh, recommend that, uh,
parliament should be exploring alternative uses
of technology to build public trust in democratic processes
and to facilitate public input in ways that don't lead
to the overwhelming committee with tens
of thousands of submissions.
Uh, we say you should commission the parliamentary library
to provide it with a report on processes
and technologies used in other countries
to facilitate meaningful public participation in development
and scrutiny of legislation.
Um, in terms of urgency, you will be unsurprised to hear
that we're, uh, quite concerned about the use of it, uh,
and the increasing use of it.
But we should be clear also that, uh,
other governments have, in our view, misused urgency.
Uh, in our exper We, we experienced this
during the Government Blast Government's response to COVID.
That was the circumstance in which some use
of urgency was clearly understandable,
but there were circumstances in which it was used
for measures that had major civil liberties implications,
such as vaccine passes, where there was no publication
of policy papers or a description of how
that system would work before parliamentary debate.
And when we made OIA requests, knowing
that this was coming up
and was going to put through under urgency,
government did not respond to provide that information
to enable us to analyze the material,
let alone inform members
of the house on the potential civil liberties implications
of, of the system that was being introduced.
Um, we also recommend
that if a bill is passed under urgency,
then standing orders should require the immediate posten
enactment scrutiny of that act by a select committee.
And we note that Professor Dean Knight of Victoria,
university of Wellington, makes a similar recommendation,
uh, in his submission.
Um, fundamentally, we think
that there's a real problem in New Zealand's political
system with select committees being the focus for the public
to have their input into policy development laws.
We have a very poor culture of exposure drafts
and consultation at earlier stages of, uh, policy
and legislative development.
And we think that's, that's something, it's obviously
outside the remit of the Standing Orders Committee,
but where it could do that, where it could make changes
to encourage better behavior is to require
that when a bill is presented to the house,
the government must table a statement which says, what,
what, what public consultation has undertaken
during development of the policy
and the bill specifically if there'd been an exposure
draft of the legislation.
Uh, and that there should, should
therefore also be a report to the select committee
that the bill is referred to, which explains
how the government has amended its initial proposals
between the exposure draft of the bill
and the bill introduced the house.
And why, uh, if there's no,
if there's been no public consultation on exposure draft the
government or the o or the other promoter of Bill,
I think it should apply to members Bills too should provide
a written statement to the of reasons, to the committee
to explain why no such consultation took place.
Be happy to answer the committee's questions.
Basically, Andrew, there's a, uh, consistent, uh,
consistency of, of opinion in your
submission from the ones that we heard last week.
And I think, uh, there is, uh, an an awareness
that certainly at this table, that, uh, the, uh,
separation of powers that should exist, uh,
have been come quite blurred, not just in recent times,
but over perhaps the last, um, you know, decade or so.
And, uh, given the amount of, uh, submission now coming to
select committees, it becomes all the more important
that you have a, uh, an independent process of, of the,
the executive, uh, for either triaging those, uh,
in some particular way, although some sance about the AI
sort of model, but, uh, ensuring that there is that, uh,
time given to each legislation. Kira McNulty,
Thank you. Um,
thank you, Mr. Jacobson.
I appreciate your submission and your comments.
I agree with your comments around the most recent example,
uh, with the Environment Committee
and note your suggested amendment to standing orders
to reflect that, um,
requiring a motion in the house would be one
way to address that.
At the very least, parliament would get the debate
that they would've otherwise got.
Have you got any thoughts on, uh, two possible alternatives?
Uh, one being that if a committee resolves your report back
early, it needs the full support of the committee,
or potentially that it needs the permission
of business committee like it does if it was to report back
after the date?
Um, I think if you, I'm not as okay with
how the business committee operates and
therefore whether there's government majority control
of the business committee, but I think
if there's government majority control
of the business committee, which wouldn't surprise me, it,
I'm not sure that referral back
to the business committee in cases
of an early report back, actually, that solves the problem.
It just, well, the business part,
it passes the responsibility. The
Business committee, uh, works
by what's called neo unanimity,
but it's the current parliament very, very unclear what, uh,
neo unanimity is.
Right. Okay.
I'm not sure referral back
to the business committee would solve the problem.
Mm-hmm. Uh, I think, uh, the idea that there should have
to be a unanimous vote of the whole select committee
for an early report back is one possibility.
I can foresee that perhaps government, uh,
members might be unhappy with that,
and certainly government business
managers might be unhappy with that.
I, I think it's worthy of consideration,
but I'm, I'm actually more inclined to suggest
that there needs to be debate on the floor
of the house about telman of a select committee, uh,
consideration of a bill, rather than it's simply
behind the committee's closed doors.
Was there a vote? Did we go this way or that way?
I can understand that rationale.
Thank you. Uh, one last question,
Lawrence. Yeah. Just, uh, supplementary
on that,
I guess we're looking at two separate things
because a report by date might be different from, uh,
the the referral date from the house.
So what, uh, what happens in terms of the both
of the options where, uh, the referral date needs
to be something that's debate in the house,
but let's say a referral date is six months, at the end,
the select committee chair then still potentially have the
mandate to truncate the report back date? Well,
Well, that, that's why we said that, um, it shouldn't,
the committee should not have the power to shorten it,
shorten it substantially, uh, unless there's a debate.
Unless there's a debate on how, so
before that decision
to cur tell the select committee consideration happens
and the bill is reported back, yeah.
If the, if the committee chair
and perhaps the majority of the committee want
to curtail it, then that should be debated in the house
before it actually goes through
and happens, so that there's at least an opportunity
for members to have their say
and potentially for a different view to be formed following
that debate on potential curtailment.
Uh, Mr. Kelson, thank you very much for your submission.
Okay. So it is right on, on the right on point
with, uh, another of things. We've already
Thank you Very much. Thank
you. Thank you. Uh, Franks,
Steven Franks and Mark Scan.
Oh, you Cocho. Um, my name is Mark Scan Lee.
We're speaking on behalf of Frank Ogilvy,
a Wellington law firm specializing
in commercial and public law.
This submission is on behalf of the firm
and is not on behalf of any client.
It reflects the firm's extensive
experience dealing with Parliament.
I think members will know Steven, a former member Parliament
and, um, highly experienced commercial and public lawyer.
I'm a former select committee clerk, former senior advisor
to the New Zealand leader of the House,
and to a leader of the government, the Senate Australia,
and leader of the opposition of the Senate Australia,
also published academic articles on perceptions
of parliament and on Legisl Legisl speed.
Our submission, which I'm sure you've read in detail, has,
uh, two main aspects.
One is about legislative speed, which I'll speak to,
and the other is around processes for, um, dealing
with a large number of select committee
submissions committees.
And Steven will speak to that side.
I just wanna start by saying I think there's a risk
of being very negative about the
New Zealand parliamentary system.
And I, I think it's easy to be overly negative.
There are great things about the way
we legislate New Zealand.
We, if the fact that almost every bill goes
to select committee is a real standout.
Now in Australia, less than
50% of bills go to select committee.
It has to, it requires a positive.
No bills are referred by the house representative.
Some, some parliaments. They don't send a single bill.
Most parliaments is one or two.
The Australian Senate sends about half its bills
to, um, to a committee.
And the average time to pass bills in Australia is 80 days.
So, you know, talk about whether you're going for six months
or four months, I mean, start to finish two chambers,
80 days, an increasing number
of bills in Australia passed within
five days of introduction.
That's through both chambers.
So, you know, there are things that this committee needs
to look at to improve the process in New Zealand,
but I'm not part of the view that it's catastrophe.
You know, there are things to improve,
but actually we do things pretty well.
There is a crunch around time,
and it's something that's come through.
I've looked at the other submissions and heard people speak.
There really is a crunch around time.
Part of that is, um,
we sit more than Australia about 84 days compared
to about 67, and we only pass about half
as much legislation a term.
So that's okay.
But then when you look at, you know, Canada
and the uk, we sit a lot less.
Main reason for that, and this is uncomfortable,
main reason is everyone else sits on Mondays.
There's a reason we don't,
New Zealand, we carve it out for cabinet.
I mean, that is one of the solutions.
Or you could just regulate sitting in the mornings,
which was a problem for select committee.
'cause you've got the house competing
committee in our submission.
I would make another suggestion.
It's a suggestion that the
committee considered about 20 years ago.
Um, it's covered in parliamentary
practice in New Zealand as an option.
I think you should bring, um, a
parallel chamber to do committee of the whole.
This works in Canberra with the Federation Chamber,
to a lesser extent at Westminster
with Westminster Hall, have committee.
The whole debates in the alleged co chamber,
whilst the house stages are proceeding in the house,
creates about 25% more legislative time
without having mps here more weeks of the year,
or on Mondays, or sitting every morning.
There'll be logistical challenges with it,
but, you know, if they can fix it,
if they can manage it in Canberra
and London, I reckon we could probably manage it here.
So that's my piece. And over to you, Steve.
My, um, suggestion, uh, primarily designed to
restore what I think is the focus for Facilit committee.
It should be the pro procedures should
serve the needs of the committee.
I think that increasingly they're becoming, um,
committees are becoming subject
to the needs for political theater.
So that huge numbers of submissions are made
as demonstrations of allegiance or fervor,
and the role of that process.
And the fundamental benefit process is in being warned
of unexpected consequences.
And I'd say secondary to it,
but very similar is for parliament, for the legislature not
to be, um, beholden entirely
to the executive or to the bureaucracy.
So it's the opportunity to get the outside view,
to get the warning, to get the material that will not come,
um, through the system or through a Wellington worldview.
And that isn't criticizing that,
it's just saying it's the way it works.
And the risk is that we end up, um, putting in burdens of
ritual listening.
Um, people trying to avoid conveying
how often they've viewed before the same banal submission
or the same expression of view that is unbearable
for good people for too long.
I think we have, I think the 2002 changes
to local government, which obliged, which,
which turned it from representative democracy
to consultative democracy
and forced counselors to spend many, um, days of their lives
listening to submissions, which did not add much material,
is really partly responsible
for the low quality of local government.
And I suggest that Parliament has it in its hands,
and committees have it in their hands to
state clearly in the standing orders
that the primary purpose of hearing submissions is
for the committee to learn of things that it
otherwise would not learn,
and that it will run its procedures to ensure that, that
that process does not become subordinated to the others.
I think you should have rules that make mean you do not have
to apologize for amalgamating large numbers
of similar submissions,
or for enabling AI
to show you whether there's anything new in any of those.
It, it, it needs, um, I won't say it's just re
re rhetorical, but the, the standing orders do need
to say clearly to people.
Um, don't come here just for political theater.
Just on your, um, written submission in relationship
to trialing staff hearing of submissions, um,
how would you ensure that staff are able to, um,
canvas different political views
or, um, angles on relationship to bills?
Because I mean, staff are not elected and
therefore don't have a mandate to particularly canvas bills
with a specific angle.
How would you ensure that the voices of voters in which
we have amended from are carried through to staff being able
to ask questions that submit us based on your proposal?
Well, the first thing I would say is,
look at the counterfactual.
Uh, the counterfactual is that there are huge numbers
of submissions now that aren't heard
and that there will be informal or formal, um, formula
or, or, or distinctions being drawn.
Um, it is a risk, uh, it would be a risk,
particularly if staff, um, we're perceived as not as,
as a, as not neutral, not apolitical.
Um, but you have a situation where it's easy now to
recognize a whole lot of people are sort of offered, um,
a hearing, but feel they don't get it.
You, you, I, I see it with our clients, people investing
with very large amounts and getting genuine expertise along,
and they get 10 minutes and the experts
actually don't want to keep doing it.
They regard it as, as a waste of their time in insulting
that's not good for the legislature. Mm-hmm.
Just checking up with this big stuff from the clerk
or which body, 'cause
that's not specified, I believe, in your
Submission. So
would it be whoever is equipped to do it?
It could be people you employ to do it.
I mean, one of the suggestions here
for hot Tubing is use the benefit of the conflict of the,
of the contention that there is anyway.
Um, arrange hearings so that you may get a lot more out
of seeing the two opposing sides who've,
who've just steeped themselves in it, um,
from testing each other than you do from, um, trying
to compete for the opportunity to be the person
to ask the question that gets broadcast on tv.
I think the, um, um, biggest value of what you're saying is
that, uh, the current system, uh,
doesn't produce the best results that you could get.
And so we do have to look at, uh, how that would, can I say,
uh, marks on, uh, personally interested in that, uh,
uh, dual chamber arrangement.
Um, and think with having a look at, particularly on, uh,
bills where there's a high degree of, of, uh, agreement,
there's a lot of legislation goes through like that.
So there are things that we should look at,
and I think the, the, uh, follow on from some
of our submissions last week, this current system is now,
I think it's 42 years old,
that we operate this particular way.
Uh, and that hasn't fully accountable for technology
that now makes submissions so much easier.
So, uh, those are valuable points,
and I thank you both for your time supplement.
And, um, we will take on, uh, take into account the, uh,
the, uh, very good submission you vote for us.
Thank you. Thank you. Uh, C Graham ler,
Thank you for inviting me along.
Um, it's my usual practice.
I think I mentioned in my submission when I'm coming
to give submission that I try
and read all of the submissions
that the other people have made, um, over the last term
or two that has become increasingly difficult.
I imagine it must be much harder for all of you, uh,
and your colleagues who are sitting on select committees,
that that just becomes difficult.
Uh, and I have a few suggestions of, here are some my,
uh, my submission, a few just ideas of ways
to encourage people.
I'm not sure they necessarily, all
of them need select comm uh, uh, standing orders changes,
but there are just some ideas, you know, sort of,
there are a lot of submissions where someone just wants
to say, I oppose this bill,
and there is a small amount
of benefit in people being able to say that.
Um, but, you know, it is a different type of be benefit
to them and being heard, and it's something you can do,
and it's something people increasingly seem to want to do,
but that's different from what types of does
that need to be in a submission.
And so one of the examples I give is encouraging people
who just want to, you know, you know, go onto the website
and tick, click it, I support this bill,
or I oppose this bill.
And sort of encouraging different ways.
You know, it might just be the way the website is set up,
encouraging different ways of people to, uh, give the,
indicate their, their views on a, on a bill
where they don't have a lot to say about
how it should be changed, but want to record.
And, you know, um, encouraging the use of petitions.
And that could be someone goes along to the, here's here's
where you enter your submission on a bill.
And the first thing is, do you just want
to say that you oppose it?
Uh, have a small thing to say
and really sort of encourage through
that process someone's name, just to be added
to one submission.
People who oppose the bill one submission, people
who support it, maybe, you know, space for, you know,
50 words or something if someone wants to add something.
Uh, and sort of, it's a useful way for someone to,
to hear something, um,
but different from the process of, here's my submission,
I've read the bill, have you considered this?
You might need to change that.
And those sorts of submissions where someone might need
to perhaps upload their submission rather than that.
Um, there are a few other ideas.
Some of them, one
of the difficulty others sometimes have in reading all the
submissions before I come along to one
of these is quite often they're not available
before the committee starts hearing the, the first line
of evidence, at least because I suspect it's just the
practice, is the committee has to agree for the submissions
to be made available to the public.
And it usually makes that decision 10 minutes
before the first people had heard from.
And so one idea that I think I've written a mine submission,
it might be in someone else's as well.
I, uh, possibly Professor Knights about the idea
of people supporting other submissions, you know, instead of
free speech union or, or whoever
or a union saying, here, put in your own submission,
you know, here, tell Parliament you like ours,
that this is one you should pay attention to.
And you know, the,
the standard way you do it on a Facebook page, you know,
you add your thumb up to that submission
and it's, oh, okay, a thousand people said we should
pay attention to the submission.
You know, it won't sway the opinion,
but when you are reading a thousand submissions, maybe
that's one of the ones you read first.
You know? Um, and,
and just examples like that of ways of encouraging people
to, who don't have something specific they want to say.
So I've read the submission that Graham Meela has made, uh,
and I support it, and there's been a few times
where I've just made a submission
and reading all of the other submissions
where I come across one submission,
and that's effectively all they
said, I endorse what Graham said.
And it's quite nice when it happens,
but difficult for it
to happen if the person isn't putting the submission online
by themselves on their own website
or something like that through the parliamentary website.
Um, I have a number of other things.
I think that the one I should specifically mention,
it's mentioned by a lot of other people,
is the approach to urgency.
The, I've got a few different ideas of,
of ways you could change the process around urgency.
The one I think I should specifically mention, that just
seems sort of the lowest hanging fruit.
If the government needs something passed quicker than
normal, but it could, oh, well this could, you know,
we need it quicker than normal, but a a month at select
committee wouldn't, wouldn't be that much of a problem.
It's in a worse position.
It has to hold maybe a debate on the house for an hour,
lose an hour of legislative time, um, to hold a month
of select committee hearings,
because that's less than the four months
where it's not just a, a simple vote.
Um, but if it, if it has actually,
we don't want any select committee time for this at all,
and we're just going to pass it under urgency,
that's a motion which is passed without debate.
Mm-hmm. And so there should not be an incentive, you know,
the loss of an hour of legislative time thought, well,
we could have had one month, but that would've cost us time.
And, and so my suggestion
of separating out urgency motions from the other aspects
that currently fall with an urgency.
So an urgency motion is set aside the current business
of the house, extend the sittings, um, ignore potentially,
you know, select committees can't meet and all those things.
And that is when something is urgent, that's appropriate.
Um, but that's a different question from should this bill
go through the ordinary process?
And there'll be times when bills should not
go through the ordinary process.
And I give the two examples.
I given the submission, the Greyhound destruction
legislation earlier, and you quite often have, oh,
something has gone wrong.
There's been a Court of appeal
or Supreme Court decision about extended supervision orders,
and a bunch of people
who are dangerous former prisoners are going to
not be on electronic bracelets if we wait a week.
And those sorts of things tend to have, you know,
if not unanimous support, then wide cross party support,
and it's appropriate for some of those to happen quickly.
Um, but it's a different question.
Should that be part of the urgency motion?
It should be urgency motion, we're going to do this,
but the house still has to separately vote.
This is a bill, which is so important
that we should avoid the ordinary processes.
And whether that's the ordinary process
of a select committee process at all,
or the ordinary process of, well,
we're having a select committee and it's shorter
or, uh, and those sorts of things.
And so separating out that's, that's a, a more serious, um,
restriction on the rights of the opposition
or of members of Parliament to hold the government
to account, then well, we just wanna extend time
or we wanna extend time.
And so the difference between having a debate on should we
set aside the ordinary business of the house just
to focus on something we say is urgent, is different from
should this particular bill
or these sets of bills go through the ordinary process. You
Think there's an issue with return agency?
So we tried, some years ago, we've introduced, uh,
extended hours, and the concept of
that I don't thinks ever been really embraced
by anyone here.
Um, it's still used. Yes.
Uh, but, um, if you look at the, the bills
that have been up the, over the last five
or six years, um, an awful lot of it is first
and second readings, um, uh, very small amount
of the whole time taken for urgency, uh,
bills through all stages.
Yes. So, uh, is is the issue then, perhaps the time
that Parliament sits in the way in which
we deal with bills? I,
I, I think for those sorts of, uh, those sorts of uses
of urgency, it is, um, those are the types,
like I think there is a lot you could deal with,
with urgency, and there are a lot of sort of little things.
The the biggest concern I, for me,
and I suspect sort of the other submitters having read most
of the submissions to you, is the use
of urgency for all stages.
And you mm-hmm. If you are not, you're prepared to sort
of have a hard look at that.
Um, my guess would be you're probably not going
to look at the sort of the possibly concerning,
but slightly less concerning issues of, well, you know,
we we're gonna go from, from a committee
of the whole straight to the third reading where sometimes,
you know, avoiding the poss possibility of, of an, of an mp,
oh, that change has been made when I wasn't there.
There's a mistake, can I get it fixed?
And you hit that with, um, it was the local democracy, um,
and the, the three waters thing.
So, oh, actually that must, you know, if
that had been under urgency, it would be the law, uh,
and the stand down barriers
and things like that, that's concerning,
but less concerning than we're gonna pass
through this whole bill in in the next two days.
Uh, and so very much, I think, yes,
the house probably doesn't sit to the ex, the length
that could or, and federation chambers
and those sorts of, uh, other ways
of getting more legisl legislative time.
Um, but yes, there was a name to it.
I mean, back when you, you used to have it, it
before you created extraordinary urgency,
and effectively everything was extraordinary urgency.
And the house is gonna sit for 23 and a half hours,
and we're just gonna keep doing until we stop.
There was sort of a, an incentive, you know, now
that it's our, well, the house still still stops about
midnight and starts again at normal business hours.
Um, it, it doesn't have quite the same feel as it used to.
Thank you very much for your time this afternoon
and the very salient points that you,
Thank You for having me. Um,
uh, Sebastian makes full on. Thank you.
Uh, trust democracy.
Simon Wright,
Andrew, is this
On call? Yeah.
Co koto. Uh, my name's Simon Wright.
Um, I'm chair of Tru Trust Democracy.
And Andrew, you've already heard from, uh,
is also on our committee, so, um,
we're gonna do this one together.
Um, so Trust Democracy is a non-partisan, uh,
nonprofit incorporated society.
Uh, it's fairly new.
2019 was when we were, were established. Mm-hmm.
Um, our mission is, um, about, um,
a more active, uh, participatory deliberative democracy.
Um, and we believe that there are opportunities
for much more scrutiny and policy development, uh,
to be done with the public, uh,
through many publics like citizens assemblies, uh,
and through digital means, um, like, uh,
tools like policy and ello.
Um, at the same time though, um, we want to defend
and strengthen the democracy we already have.
Uh, and that's urgent because New Zealand has weak, uh,
or missing safeguards.
Our written submission focuses on how
to improve parliament's existing processes.
Um, but for our oral,
we've broken down our recommendations into three themes.
Um, so from dependency to independence, uh,
from procedural hearings to partic participatory engagement,
and another one on how
to improve accessibility to information.
So the first area concerns major flaws in
how democracies operate.
That's, these are flaws that, uh, replicated in democracies
around the world, representative democracies,
and they're contributing
to declining public trust and confidence.
So, in essence,
many people feel the state doesn't respect them, uh,
that their voices aren't heard.
While powerful interests voices are heard,
and when people feel that democracy is at risk, um,
because success of governments
and the public service have been poor at public
participation in policy
and legislative development, the select committee process
has become the main and often the
which people be heard.
It's an unrealistic expectation given
how committees currently function.
Historically, select committees are constrained in several
ways due to parliament's dependence on the executive
for funding and resources, for example, despite the conflict
of interest, committees rely on public servants whose duty
is to administer, to advise 'em and analyze submissions.
Committees are pressured
to meet government timetables rather than taking the time
needed to more genuine genuinely scrutiny, not
Be involved. See
some background information that we can
Need to make high quality submissions,
making committees dependent on the quality.
And
So time constraints.
Also making committees often give subject matter export
experts only five minutes to speak, uh,
which seems crazy when you know
that expertise could be viable.
Um, I think MPS recognize these problems,
but the reason given for not tackling them
is often a lack of funding.
Um, much of this boils down
to the executive's dominant funds.
I think the good news is that the passage
of the Parliament Bill offers an opportunity
to, to address this.
Uh, few submissions I think have, have asked the how,
um, the Parliament Bill can be used to help, um,
parliament regain a bit of control, um,
and tackle some of these problems.
So we think the Standing Orders review, uh,
should recommend an open public inquiry
by a specially constituted select committee
to determine the priorities for additional resources.
Uh, is it more staff for the Office of the Clerk,
a better website, um, uh, am broadcasting so that
of proceedings so that people in rural areas can actually
follow what's going on, all of those things.
Other things, um, fundamental question, I think
for such a committee inquiry would be
what resources are needed to operate as a modern parliament,
uh, in a contemporary society
where citizens are no longer deferential
or tolerant of being kept in the dark?
As an aside, we note that comments during the consideration
of the Parliament Bill, um,
that the Parliament Parliamentary Budget Setting Committee
would operate like the Officers of Parliament Committee.
This is worrying to us
because that committee doesn't actually hear evidence from
the public as to
what the public thinks the priorities should be.
Our experience of procedural oral submissions
to select committees has been disappointing.
For example, only three mps attended
our Public Service Amendment bill submission,
and one of those spent the whole time, uh, doing email.
Um, oral submissions I don't think are currently
opportunities for dialogue
because of submitters ask questions.
They're rolled out of order.
It's the MP's job to ask questions, not submitters.
I think this reflects an outdated model of, of,
of an adversarial, um, court like, uh, hearing.
Um, it's not the best way
of actually sharing knowledge and learning.
If the select committee stage is meant
to enable public participation, we should ask
what better engagement looks like.
Parliaments in Westminster
and Dublin have successfully used citizens assemblies
to inform inquiries.
We should explore whether legislative scrutiny could draw on
similar sorts of processes.
Um, but fundamentally, the problem I think, for overload
of select committees, um, starts earlier.
We need much more part, um, better
and more participatory models for policy development.
This would ease the pressure on committees.
And then, um, finally from me, um,
I think there are straightforward ways
to improve the current system in terms
of access to information.
Um, select committee pages for bill should link directly
to relevant background policy information.
Uh, we've come a long way in, in proactive, um, uh, dis um,
publish publication of information,
but we're still poor at presenting it
coherently to the public.
So aid understanding
and participation in the legislative process.
Our submission lists out some, uh,
suggestions for improving that.
Um, there's the issue
of departmental reports being analyzing submissions
that are published after the scrutiny, uh, of the committee,
which means that, um, the public can't review those reports
and correct any problems with them.
So that's another, uh, thing we'd like to see changed. Okay.
And, um, just mindful we're right up Absolutely.
I've got a timer front of me. I'm conscious of that. Yeah.
Um, a lot of submitters to this
and previous standing orders review committees have made
suggestions and recommendations that are helpful in terms
of thinking about how we could strengthen Parliament.
Its work, but they're technically out,
out of scope for the review.
So one example would be improvements
to Parliament's website.
We think there needs to be a better channel
for considering these ideas
and a more robust process for considering more of them.
This would enable Parliament to more steadily engage
with reformed Bit staff, rather
Three years.
And the good starting point will be
to look at the UK experience
and work the House of Province Modernization. C
Um, and this was first established in 1997
after the general election
and its remit was to consider how the practices
and procedures of the house should be modernized.
And many of their recommendations have
been implemented since then.
For example, the 1997 committee proposed the establishment
of a second debate in chamber adjacent
to the commons called Westminster Hall
to expand the time available
for lower profile business and debates.
And there's been reforms to standing, uh, uh,
to select committees and so on.
They've looked at facilities for the media, how
to connect parliament with the public alternative options
to the committee stage of bills and parliamentary standards.
And we think that similar modernization committee
for Al Parliament should also consider the composition
and functions of a second chamber
and review the number of mps we have.
As we pointed out in our submission,
Ireland has a similar population to New Zealand,
but has about 60 more mps plus an upper house.
And that's because their constitution requires electoral
representation to fall within a set ratio
of mps to the public.
Um, so there's a, there's a number of other things I think
that the Clark or the Parliamentary library could, uh,
advise the committee on the work of the House
of Commons Modernization Committee
and similar measures in different legislatures,
but we think that the a a similar select committee should
run it in the next parliament
as at least in the next parliament,
if not, continue after that.
Yeah. We, the, this committee meeting now is round about
six or seven months, uh, ahead of
what we might normally do in an electric cycle.
So we we're mindful of the points you make around that.
Yeah. Worth considering. Any questions?
Thank you very much for your submission. Appreciate it.
Thank you. Paul Lewis Donovan,
Um, KDA, for those of you don't know me, I'm Lou Donovan,
a current ministerial advisor
to the Honorable James Meger, who's joined.
Um, and prior to that, I was the house advisor
to Chris Bishop and an opposition served as the WIPs advisor
to the Honorable Chris Pink.
And I should just highlight that this submission is
reflective of my own personal views
and, um, not of my current and former employers,
although I hope my current employer does at least think I'm
saying something of some sense.
I wanted to highlight a couple of quite niche, um, aspects
of the standing orders in my submission
that I don't think would receive a huge amount
of attention from perhaps other submitters submitting on
more broader topics regarding urgency
and, uh, select committees.
The first of that regard, first of that is
around the address and reply debate.
So I think, and may be from just my personal experience,
having been the house advisor at the change of government,
having to coordinate
and organize some of this, I found that the,
the 19 hours set out in standing orders is quite a long
time, uh, to run this debate, particularly given the way,
um, the way it's structured,
taking precedent over all other government business
when you're trying to also fit in maiden statements
and maiden speeches into this debate.
It became quite a tricky, uh, tricky scheduling.
You know, I'd call it a bit of a nightmare
because you were trying to also, um, fit the preferences
of every political party.
You didn't want the, um, the leave the house
to be directing other parties when their made speeches were
going to be, and also you're trying
to accommodate members wanting to do them, particularly
before the dinner break, which made it, um, quite complex.
I think that the current system where, you know, MPS elected
outside of that, that process right
to the business committee or the speaker, um,
and their, their statements are scheduled accordingly.
I think that's more appropriate. I think
that you could reduce the time
and put more, um, put, put the owners back on the whips
to organize their own MPS main speeches.
I don't think that having to fit them in to the address
and reply debate is, um, in keeping
with the more representative MMP parliaments we have
and also with high rates of new, new members.
Um, one of the other things I wanted
to highlight was around motions.
At, at the moment, standing orders allows for a single type
of motion, um, that's 10 minute, you know, 10 minute calls
until a closure motions moved.
I think that this has particularly,
I I would highlight these days, prevented some motions, um,
from being debated
where the house would probably like the opportunity
to debate significant, um, significant world events, um,
the deaths of notable individuals.
So in my submission, I lay out particular types of motions
that could be categorized in the standing orders
with some more parameters set around those.
I think just to give members in the government a bit more,
uh, assurance when granting leave to, to move those motions
that they're not going to, uh, disrupt the sitting
of the day of the legislative program.
One of the other things that, um,
and I know the submission from from Peter Hor who's
following me, um, goes into some detail on this
around special debates.
Um, it's something that has been tossed around for,
for at least when I was so the house advisor
and the whoops advisor around trying
to find the right topics.
I think there is a question
that the committee could ask whether
or not special debates are fit for purpose.
Um, but also in the submission that Peter will,
will probably speak to is around how
the general debate has morphed into, um,
five minutes soundbites.
Um, you know, through, it's just, it's just the way
that way that it's worked.
And I think special debates, um,
and we need to see now that they've been scheduled, kind
of trying to take topics out of er, I think if we,
if there was a system where they were more
set out in advance, the committees
or me should be encouraged to write
to the business committee proposing the topics
and the business committee or the speaker could choose
what topic is to be debated.
I think some
of these special debate opportunities often just become
local issue debates
because the, you know, the office of the leader
of the house is figuring out how to use those seven hours
and they, if there's no topics that have been presented
or are waiting on the order paper to be debated,
that's just what it falls to.
Um, that was obviously
what the general debates in its infancy was supposed to be,
and I think we've strayed away from that.
So I think I'd encourage the committee to look at
at least comparing special debates in the general debate
and how we might be able to, to make them more fit
for purpose and better.
Uh, the last thing that I said in my submission was
around the annual review debates and the estimates debates.
It seems that every six months following, uh,
the annual review and estimates, debates in the house,
everyone has various ideas on how to improve them.
Um, there's a brief discussion
and then we come back six months later
and repeat it all again.
Uh, there's often discussions around the timing,
and I know most, most people
around this table have been whipped
and will have had their books written down for the times
and told their members or spokespeople
how long they've got to speak.
They'll have watched ministers run down the clock
and then figure out that they've got an hour left
of the debate with ministers having no opportunity
to respond to questions.
I think they're potentially some,
particularly the estimates debate is one of the, you know,
fundamental most important debates to parliament
around the executives, um, you know, ability to, to spend.
And I think it deserves more, um, engagement.
And you don't, you don't want the times the time constraints
to artificially constrained the debate
or the, um, the ability for members to ask questions.
I think like any good committee stage, you want the minister
to be, to be standing up responding to questions,
engaging in debate, rather than trying to provide
as brief a comment as possible so
that the select committee chair then has five minutes
to give the select committee report.
I think we should also be flexible given
that in an MMP environment, you know,
and you look at the current parliament, a lot of the,
the ministers that are requested by the opposition
to appear, um, you know,
it's ended up being quite a few national party ministers,
but also then the chairs of the select committee
also being from the same party chew up
the time it's been allocated.
If every select committee chair has five minutes to speak,
Well, we, we did. You'd
be aware that there was a proposal to change that.
Yes, but not, not embrace.
And I think, um, that's something that people are mindful
of, but they're also scared of losing some stuff.
And I think, And I think one other thing,
can I just ask you, 'cause uh, we don't need to go Yeah.
Through your full submission, but, um,
if you think about the origin of the Westminster system,
it was at a time when there was very poor communications,
uh, large tracks, the population couldn't read,
couldn't write, uh,
and certainly transport was a, a big barrier
to people coming to any gathering that might discuss law.
So, uh, do you think at times we've sort of taking
that system, tweaking it a little bit without realizing
that actually the, the the way in which society deals
with things has changed, uh, in ex extraordinarily in the,
uh, in the last short while?
We're not kind of keeping pace with that
because something like the general debate, uh,
I would've said that a lot of that, uh,
is lifted off the planetary website.
It goes on to social media.
It's a, it's a horrible waste of time.
I sat through them all this year, uh,
last two years actually.
I can't say that I enjoy them one little bit, but it
nonetheless is a, a a a five minutes of free flow,
uh, talk to the people you want to talk to,
make the point you wanna make.
I don't think we should lose that entirely from Parliament.
No, and I, I, I wouldn't, I wouldn't suggest losing
that entirely, but I think giving some more shape
or scope to how those debates are run.
So I think having a free for all five minutes, um,
has just become a speech to go on social media.
Whereas some of the special debates were obviously
to debate topics that the committees
or members, uh, feel like aren't being addressed.
And I think that having a bit more structure
around those debates, um, are more valuable
to members if they're gonna be
coming down to spend their time.
Um, but I, I would say
that most general debate speech now are primarily to
to be used for, um, publication on social media.
I don't think that to, to, you know, you see a lot
of the local issues, uh, debates members are getting up
and speaking quite passionately about
local constituent issues.
And I think the general debate, uh,
you'll notice probably from having sat through
and listened to all of them this year, very few of them,
or two, two years, actually two years.
Two years, uh, very few of them would probably be able
to go into much detail because they'll have been given a
key message to speak to.
Um, and this is, well,
I doubt they actually attract much of a following on.
Well, well, I, I, I mute Parliament TV
after question time on a Wednesday.
I can't say I listen to any today.
They, um, you kind of already know what they're gonna say.
Mm-hmm. Probably gonna have to stop you there, Lewis, just,
uh, it's a matter of time and call Peter.
Thank you, Lewis. Thank you. Thanks. Thanks, Laurie.
Perfect. Interesting
Honor, Mr. Speaker, thanks
for the opportunity
to speak to the committee.
Uh, today.
I'd like to start in the same manner as Louis by, uh,
making it clear that this is a personal submission.
It went through no, uh, sort of approval process, uh,
with the Labor Party either
before or after it was submitted.
And I'm very keen to hear what Kieran
and Tracy think of it this afternoon.
Um, surprise.
I've been around as, as I say, in at the end
of my submission for some time now.
I think I've been through seven of these standing review,
uh, committees.
Um, and it seems to me that the, the, the subjects
that people are concerned about don't change.
There's urgency, there's appropriate use of time and so on.
And yet we rarely make much movement forward in terms
of providing workable solutions to those things.
I, and I think this is partly
because everybody's on the bridge
of the ship staring into the far distance looking
for this mythical land where there's no urgency
and no patsy questions.
And there's plenty of time to debate everything fully
and appropriately, but without really expressing
an informed view
or a detailed view of how you get from where we are
to there, wherever it is.
And in this submission, what I've tried to do is
to leave the bridge and go down to the engine room
and just sort of tinker about to suggest a few changes
that might well help us get some of the way there.
Um, so I'm trying to put a few things on the agenda, uh,
and also provide a few solutions that might not
otherwise be before the committee.
Now I'm prepared to talk about some of those,
particularly related to urgency
and the idea of examining upcoming legislation
and how it should be dealt with
through a subcommittee of the business committee.
But if, first of all you've got any questions about my
written submission or if you've got particular areas
that you'd like me to focus on,
then I, I'd invite you to do that.
Now,
I do, if I may have a, have a question
that is supplementary to your submission mm-hmm.
That I'd like your thoughts on, but I do want to, uh,
acknowledge both the last submission and this one actually,
and the input that you've put into them.
And I think they're both incredibly constructive. Mm-hmm.
Thank you. That, that,
that comes in some relief, I must say.
Um, I talk then, first of all about urgency.
Um, there, there is, you know, widespread agreement.
I have to say that looking at, at, at, at the,
the Clark submission and the increase of the use
of emergency over the last decade
or side, it did suddenly, uh, dawn on me,
that's the person responsible
for scheduling the government's legislation for six years.
I'd probably be responsible
for scheduling more urgency than anybody else in the entire
history of the New Zealand parliament.
So it's my own cold, dark soul I'm looking into here.
Um, what I've done is, and, and,
and the main reason we have urgency actually is
'cause there isn't enough time in the normal sitting year.
And, and the removal of two weeks
through scrutiny weeks has actually
exacerbated this a little.
Um, and so what I suggested is a new way
of the government creating time,
but I want to provide a balancing disincentive to that.
And so I propose what I've called supplementary sittings,
and that will be an extension of Thursday sitting
into Thursday evening,
and throughout Friday to finish at six o'clock on Friday.
These would have to be singled a month
or so in advance to the business committee so that
MPS could arrange their diaries appropriately
and they would largely follow normal rules in terms
of advancing through one stage at a time.
The one exception I would make to that, and,
and this the government has to have incentives
to go down this path, is to say
that third readings can follow immediately upon committee
stages because this doesn't impinge upon the quality of
scrutiny because the chance
to amend the bill has gone by that time.
And, um, the risk is entirely with the government
because if a, a mistake is found
after that, then they have to go back to the very start
and pass another piece of legislation rather than simply
recommit, which doesn't happen very often,
but it does happen from time to time.
If that were to happen once a month when
during the sitting year, then that could create
115 additional hours
and that would be 115 hours taken out hopefully, of urgency
and extended sittings.
I would initially keep extended sittings going,
but if these things work,
then you could actually look at a future review about
removing the government's right to, uh,
implement extended sittings by motion
and leave that entirely
with the business committee over things like treaty
settlement legislation, about which
there's widespread agreement.
I wouldn't do that initially
because it might have a sort of counterproductive effect.
It might actually end up by one balancing against the other.
You've gotta balance making it easier for the government
to extend the sitting hours with a disincentive.
And the one tinkering about in the machinery that I,
I propose is that any bill
that has a reading under urgency, that bill
and the, the, the duration of the debate on first, second
or third reading will be two hours.
In other words, after the 10, uh, the 12
scheduled speakers are going,
the clock still runs opposition,
MPS can fill up that two hours.
And so it will mean that to pass a bill through all stages
rather than get the reading started in two
and a half hours as is currently the case.
It would, or it could, if the opposition felt so inclined,
take six hours to do that,
and that would be a massive disincentive to, uh,
the government to actually using urgency for other, the,
the bills that did have some sort
of genuine urgency about 'em.
And the RA is, um, as I think Brian was saying, that, um,
if you have a bill about which there is genuine urgency,
but widespread agreement, the business committee might agree
to put that through all stages quickly
so it wouldn't actually have the label
of urgency attached to it.
Um, I, if you've got any questions about urgency,
Well, um, yes. No,
yeah, I just, I think it's
quite a, it's a good suggestion.
Well, with, um, uh, considering, so if you think about
extended hours was a, a, a attempt to reduce the amount
of urgency, gain more hours for the house,
what you are suggesting, uh, I think if it did work,
would replace that, that, uh,
hopefully quite successfully, and
It wouldn't come across that committee time either.
Yeah. That certainly addressed the point you made
earlier about how the
Urgency, uh, motion as Filled with first read.
Yeah. Mm-hmm. The other thing is, I was gonna ask you,
Peter, uh, I am perplexed about the one hour first reading,
uh, I, I don't understand that.
I think one hour second reading, I'd understand.
Mm-hmm. But, um,
It, it came about the last annual, the orders review,
and it was a way of creating
the two weeks for scrutiny weeks.
Yeah, I know you do do that by swapping them over. Yeah.
And, and I think I've,
I'll ask the committee to look at that at some point.
Yeah, no, I, I'd support that. Mr. Smith.
Alright. One question here.
Oh, so no, I was just going to further to your comment.
I was just saying, because that's
post, um, select committee.
So isn't there an opportunity to share
with everybody what's happened in the
Select committee to a point, but the select
committee report is available.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. True.
And you, you know, you, you're sort of,
of regurgitating a whole lot of stuff where the, the,
the contentious bit should be,
should be outlined in the first reading.
Mm-hmm. Um, yeah. Anyway, um, thank you very much.
Peter, I have a question. You've a question here.
Um, I hope this isn't the end for you, Peter. Thanks,
Peter. Um,
I am keen to get your thoughts on, uh,
the way committee stages are currently presided over, um,
because, uh, as we all know, residing officers need
to take into consider a range of things
before considering enclosure motion.
Mm-hmm. Relevance
and repetition being two things, ministerial
participation being another,
but at the moment, there's no ability
for a presiding officer to distinguish
between opposition parties as to which parties are,
uh, complying with the requirements and which aren't.
And so it's possible
that one party could cause the closure
of the committee stage when in this parliament it's three,
it could be a different number in other parliaments,
but nevertheless, the point remains.
Um, do you have some thoughts on changing this
to allow presiding officers to indicate to one party
you've done your dish,
but these other parties that continue
to comply can continue to contribute?
I mean, there, there's no reason,
I don't think under the current rules
where, why that couldn't happen.
If you want to promote it, I would suggest that the best way
of doing it is by a line
or two in, in the report of the committee,
which could then be incorporated in the next edition
of Speaker's Rules.
Mm-hmm. Yeah, I can see some problems with that. Mm-hmm.
Is there a, a last brief question. Yeah.
Very brief question, not in your comments on, um,
Pepsi questions and some constructive solutions.
What use do you see if any
of Pepsi questions altogether? I, I,
I think there should be some way for the government
to promote, um, you know, it its own program, its own ideas.
Um, and I don't advocate the, the abolition of those.
As I said, I'd like to change the balance
of supplementary questions.
So there, there are fewer, perhaps the questions,
but I have seen one or two other parliaments alternatives
to this, uh, in terms of the government having, you know,
10 minutes to make announcements about things.
And I mean, it, it quite excruciating really.
I mean, it makes Patsy appear, you know, a much more sort
of civilized proper way of doing it.
So cut them back, but don't get rid
of them. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Peter. It is very useful.
It's nice to know that both you
and Louis are on, on the precinct for
the discussion of required.
Thanks, Peter. I think we now have, uh, a submitter online.
Is that right? Yeah,
it's really interesting.
Hmm. Good submission. Nice stuff.
Yeah, useful. Absolutely.
Good idea.
How are we going?
So hopefully I'm unmuted.
Yes, you're unmuted.
Um, oh, there you're, we're. We can see you.
Yes. Great. Lovely Mine.
Carry on. Sorry. Yeah,
Yeah. Great. Uh,
uh, good afternoon everybody.
Uh, my name's Jonathan Godfrey.
Uh, I am, uh, uh, recognized, uh,
as a leader amongst disabled people's organizations.
Uh, up until its dismantled, I was a member
of parliament's accessibility reference, um,
committee reference group.
Uh, if the, uh, reference group that I was part
of still existed, there would've been an avenue to address,
uh, the primary concern
or the most extreme concern raised in my submission.
Um, but this is a pretty good opportunity nonetheless,
and maybe we would've ended up here anyway.
I believe that many people in the New Zealand public
are tired of the way mps refer to each other
in a derogatory manner.
We wouldn't welcome that language
of our children or our grandchildren.
Um, but we seem to watch mps let some of it slide
with respect to the way fellow mps speak about
yet more mps.
And the worst offense, uh,
for disabled people in the current term would've been the
use of the R word in mid 2024.
The C word got a lot of media attention,
but that wasn't directed at another human being.
It was stated in a general sense,
whereas the R word was very definitely pointed at another
individual who quite clearly, um,
does not meet the dictionary definition of a retard.
But that was used as an insult of a fellow mp.
And while I think the behavior of one MP is despicable
for using that term on a fellow human being
who is quite clearly intelligent enough
and responsive enough to be a member of parliament,
it's on the rest of you that I think the problem lies
because it was let
go unaddressed in a significant manner.
I'm very sure the media, uh,
and hope fellow mps would have pulled anyone into line
who used the N word, who used the C word on an individual.
And I could go on, um, quite a lot.
I do believe of language
that most mps understand is not appropriate to use.
It is outmoded.
We don't refer to people as spastics anymore, for example.
But the way that question time
and sometimes the general debate,
and even sometimes when ministers are responding
to opposition, mps questioning their education, questioning,
um, so much about them as humans,
is juxtaposed against the fact that you're not allowed
to call each other a liar.
I do believe that this language
and the way you address each other sets the standard for
how you want other systems in New Zealand to operate.
Do you really want principals to let
students call each other retards,
or is that going to be out of line?
Uh, thank you. My only request
of people is I don't recognize all your voices,
so if you do ask a question,
can you please tell me your name first?
It's, uh, uh, Jerry Brownley here, Jonathan. Oh,
I do recognize your voice.
You get a lot of air time on Parliament tv.
That's gone straight to my head.
Um, uh, look, uh, thank you very much for you so much.
And I think it is a good one. And it's timely,
and it's, it's, uh, uh, it comes to something that's,
that our standing orders, uh, should not have to prescribe
in, in my opinion.
Um, and I've been in parliament a fairly long time,
and I've always prided myself on never making statements
that were personally directed at other mps.
I think you can make your points
on policy and everything else.
So I agree with you. When I first came here, actually,
there was a whole blue book that had a list
of band words in it.
Mm-hmm. And, uh,
in the second term, I was here, it went missing.
But, um, uh, uh, you know,
I wouldn't like to see bring back.
But I think the real point you make is if members
of Parliament can't respect each other, then
how do we expect members
of the public to respect each other?
And, uh, very Tommy that you've, you've made the submission,
Kieran Ulti is next voice. You'll hear
Kiro. Jonathan, uh,
thank you very much for that submission.
I think it's entirely fair
and, uh, gives us cause for further consideration on how
that might be addressed moving forward.
Mm-hmm. Mr. Speaker, are you aware that
that Blue Book is available in the parliamentary library?
No, I wasn't. No, We found it. We found it.
Oh, did you? Yeah. Yeah.
But, um, it, it does, uh, um, nevertheless, it,
it's not, have you used
Any of those words? The,
The, the existence of that book that, uh, includes words
that were once banned is not a reference point
in Parliament moving forward.
It's not something like speaker's ruling, standing orders,
perhaps even parliamentary practice in New Zealand that
as part of a, a debate members might be able to refer to.
Um, and I think your points, uh, give us reason
to consider whether the current provisions around, uh,
members being able to, uh, indicate offense
or ability for members through points of order
or other mechanisms to, um, raise concern about, um,
comments made by other members that are clearly offensive,
uh, to individuals
and communities. So, thank you very much.
Thank you. Um, I would love to see, uh,
the Blue Book myself.
I believe that language has evolved. Mm-hmm.
Uh, and, um, uh, Mr.
Brown's been in Parliament longer than some words
that my children use, uh, uh,
have evolved in their lifetimes.
Um, and there are certain words that,
that have become increasingly offensive
and others that are just nothing.
Words when, once they might have been considered offensive.
So maybe a second edition of the Blue Book with, um,
with some external advice, uh, from people who are affected
by the language in particular, would be a way to go.
That's fair. Jonathan,
thank you very much for your submission.
Uh, it's, uh, most useful
and, uh, very practical, so thank you very much.
Thank you.
Um, Ethan McCormick, can you hear us?
Yes. Thank you. Way you go.
Thank you very much for your time.
Perfect. Thank you. Um, KDA, thank you for having me.
Uh, my name is Ethan McCormick.
I'm a resident of Hawick in East Auckland
and a master's student at the University
of Auckland studying politics and international relations.
I'm passionate about conservation and the environment,
and as a young New Zealander,
I have thought deeply about the lineage
of many issues which affect my life.
Today, I'm particularly interested in legislative scrutiny.
The committee has noted a substantial rise
in public submissions.
I believe it is reasonable
that key submissions are selected,
and others summarized committees should consider the
substantive points raised in submissions,
while also taking into account the overall balance
of support and operas opposition.
The rise in submissions reflects healthy civic engagement,
but it also signals frustration when laws are passed quickly
With limited consultation, people look for outlets
to express their concerns.
This brings me to my key point.
I am deeply concerned about the overuse of urgency.
This issue isn't new, of course,
Jeffrey Palmer warned about it in 1979
that New Zealand had had the fastest law in the West.
The use of urgency rose under the Muldoon governments
and has increased again in recent years.
Across the past three governments, the share
of bills passed under urgency in the first eight months has
jumped from 6% to 24% to 36%.
The current government has already used urgency without
select committees, more than any since at least 1987,
excessive urgency, weakened scrutiny,
reduces legislative quality
and erodes public trust as Forest
and Byrd, CEO Nicola Toki put it,
it's like drinking coke from a fire hose, just trying
to keep on top of all that reform.
Indeed, I felt the same as a first time submitter trying
to engage meaningfully with legislation.
Moving at such speed.
To show the dangers of rushed lawmaking, I want
to briefly provide a cautionary tale,
which I believe is particularly powerful,
and that is the rabbit nuisance act of 1881.
European settlers introduced rabbits
to New Zealand in the 1830s,
which soon became a major agricultural pest in response
to the importation of muids.
In this case, stokes weasels
and ferrets was widely advocated as a means of control.
Despite the warnings of prominent naturalists
after initial support and earlier bills seeking
to ban the importation of Muids was defeated.
In 1876,
after part persistent lo uh, lobbying,
the rabbit nuisance bill of 1881 was drafted.
This bill proposed protections for enemies of the rabbits
keen to clear land for agrarian reform.
The executive introduced the bill hot on the heels
of a near continuous two weeks, sitting
on the heavily contested representation bill fatigued mps
provided minimal scrutiny.
The rabbit nuisance bill was introduced on the
6th of September and passed its third reading
just three days later.
It was approved by the legislative council on the 15th,
as predicted, MUIDS wrecked havoc on native wildlife.
Today, we call ourselves Kiwis.
We adorn our currency with native species.
Yet many of these creatures, like Kiwi
and kakapo, have been decimated to the point
that they have effectively disappeared from our landscapes.
It's clear, it's a clear historical lesson.
When lawmaking is too fast,
the consequences can last for generations.
I believe clear criteria should govern when urgency is
justified, reserved only for genuine emergencies,
not political convenience.
The speaker and consultation
with party leaders should determine whether those criteria
are met, each time urgency is proposed.
And the longer term, there's room
for broader reform to strengthen scrutiny.
But the immediate priority must be to tighten the rules
around the, the use of urgency.
We live in an era where amid profound uncertainty,
a misplaced sense of certainty seems
to flourish in the spirit of genuine legislative scrutiny.
I urge that we preserved within ourselves a measure
of doubt, a humility of thought
as we look towards the future.
Like many New Zealanders, I care deeply about this place
as a young person, I feel it is my duty
to do better than previous generations have done for my own.
And I hope the committee will feel the
same. Thank you very much
For your submission.
We've got one question from, uh, Dr. Lawrence. Nan. Cool.
Sure. Thank you. Um, thank you, speaker.
Thank you, Ethan, for your submission.
I just wanna check in terms of the final example you give
as an example for, uh,
determine urgency and proper scrutiny.
Um, can I just check, and I don't know if,
and I don't see that mention in your submission,
whether you also consider that kind of the, the type
of advice that has been given to the select committee
or even to the mps as part of that scrutiny process.
Um, because I think for something like that, um,
not all mps being experts in every single area,
whether you would think that that's probably
where the focus should be, is the resourcing for advice.
Um, I, I think that's part of it.
Um, I mean, I, I think, you know,
if if bills are being passed
with such urgency in such a short space of time,
then I think there isn't time for, for consideration.
I think, you know, there, there should be
resourcing of a device as well.
I think I'd very much be open to that.
Um, I'm gonna talk about those prominent
naturalists in that example.
Um, there were some very big names from that time.
I mean, we're talking about Bullah,
Hector Huan, all of these people.
We've got species named after them, for instance.
Um, so, so there was proper, um, advice initially,
but the, the, the period of time was so, was so small.
So yes, I think proper resourcing advice
would be, would be useful.
But again, coming back to the, the legislative scrutiny, um,
reducing the use of urgency, I think is key.
Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, thank you very much for your,
your time this afternoon.
We appreciate points you make and the very, uh, uh, swift
and salient way in which you've made them.
Thanks very much. Thank you.
Thank you. I appreciate it.
Killed up. Craig, how you going?
Uh, I'm Sherry Brownley, chair of the committee.
We're in your hands. We've got five minutes to hear, uh,
what you have to tell us and maybe some questions.
Got it. Thank you. Uh, yeah.
First of all, I noted in my submission about dyslexia
and 20 years ago, uh, since, since, uh,
it was recognized that nobody's ever followed through
that there's actually any policy, uh, throughout parliament
around, uh, dyslexia and neuron disabilities.
Uh, so yeah, we, we just completely,
from a disability perspective, completely unfit
for purpose, I would say Parliament.
Uh, I've noted, uh, an all select committee, uh, for,
for your Justice Select committee about, uh, problems
with the committee of how it's conducted, uh,
and how, uh, members of that committee
and panel then are speaking negatively.
That's published thousands of times, uh,
through online, uh, commentary.
Uh, that just, uh, just puts your, your, your,
your fellows at, at select committee.
Basically, you're not even just referring it to parliament
that, so I can be sitting and,
and talk, talking to a Justice Select committee
and then see the chair
or people's past chairs talking ne very negatively about
other members of parliament.
In 2018, I put a complaint in about, uh, uh,
a select committee bullying, uh, a member,
which then you had a, a review
of parliament and stuff for bullying.
Uh, I don't think you really, uh, looking into
what gets published online, uh, uh,
and, uh, the more senior, the, uh, politicians quite often,
uh, uh, are the ones that are most, uh, uh, prevalent
and that, so, uh, and,
and that we, we, we see it all the time
and stuff, things that are then published thousands of times
that are just negative about certain
and pick on certain mps, uh, uh,
and people that have, uh,
different views in parliament and so forth.
So, uh, I, I've referred it to the Justice Committee
and for it to be passed onto the scrutiny as of Parliament.
And the response I've got, basically, they're,
they're not held accountable by anybody, basically.
Uh, I've asked them to refer it to yourself as the speaker
of the house, uh, uh, and that which they've refused
and said they don't have no place to,
and basically, they, they put themselves above the law.
Um, I would say that how,
how they conduct themselves anywhere,
they're always come across as entitled.
Um, and,
and justice is far from, uh, our natural justice is,
is never relevant throughout Justice Select committees and,
and that, so yeah, I think there's a lot of work to do on
how you structure parliament, how you structure,
and how you hold accountable your political parties
and your leaders of your parties.
Because I think these are often your biggest offenders.
And this just doesn't happen within parliament or online.
It actually happens throughout your, uh, your, your, your,
uh, parties, political parties,
and that throughout, that's, that's driven by,
by your MPS and so forth.
Uh, so yeah, I think there's lots of reviews and, uh, uh,
and lots of, uh, issues that you've got to
how you do perceive as a parliament.
So the earlier gentleman's, uh, presentation
that pointed out, uh, uh, also about the same sort
of points, uh, uh, speaking negatively about other members
of Parliament and stuff, I'd fully support.
Yeah, look, I, I think, um, I would say, uh,
the, the, the personal attacks that, uh,
occasionally occur are pretty much occasional.
There's, um, well, it might be your view,
but, uh, we are here all the time.
And the other point I'd make is that
we do take cyber bullying extremely seriously.
Uh, we have a, uh, security committee, uh,
that looks into all of these cases.
Some of 'em are very difficult to trace.
Uh, the other thing is that we have a parliamentary
commissioner for standards.
Um, and she's been, uh, in that role for four years.
Uh, and in the last, uh, two years,
there have been absolutely no complaints, uh,
to her office at all.
And so there has been a lifting of standards
around the place that may not be always evident, uh,
but it's certainly on, on the, uh, the, the factual,
uh, analysis of, of, of particularly the parliamentary, uh,
uh, commission, uh, standards work would suggest that, uh,
there is certainly change occurring.
But I nonetheless take, take your
Points as one example of be won.
Ray Tim, there is publications all the time,
and it will come across, it comes from New Zealand first.
Uh, if you watch, uh, New Zealand first, uh,
what the, what they have as the conference
and, uh, watch that online,
that's repeated thousands of times and stuff.
It's all negatively spoke about other members of Parliament.
I think you've got Rose Tinney glasses, Jerry,
and I think you're possibly, uh, missing, uh,
what I'm seeing and not really looking at
what content is online. Well, the,
The, the speaker certainly can't look into the activities
of political parties outside of Parliament.
That is, that is a, uh, a, an interesting point
that you raised, but not something that, uh,
that the standing orders would ever give us reach into
Is a code of conduct though, isn't it?
It's how, and a speaker of the house, you're supposed
to be the, the, the one that holds everybody accountable.
You've gotta start with your own, your own house.
Then how you hold them accountable
and have a look, see what is online then,
and see what's repeatedly published.
And that, I think that's a big issue when it's stopping.
I think that's your own failing eth.
Yeah. And you're, uh, uh, subscribing
to me more authority than
I've actually got in this position.
Mm-hmm. But, uh, nonetheless, uh, thank you for your,
your opinion and uh, for your submission.
Can you pass it on to somebody then
who has the authority then please?
Well, it's hard to say who that would be.
It is the voters and
Well unaccountable then, like I said in my submission.
Yeah. Well, we're in a bit of a catch 22 here, but, uh,
Yeah, well beg its a differ to disagree then.
Thank you. Thank
For your time. Thank
You. Got.